templates/000-feature-template.md, before:

- Feature Name: (fill me in with a unique ident, my_awesome_feature)
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: [amundsen-io/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/amundsen-io/rfcs/pull/0000) (after opening the RFC PR, update this with a link to it and update the file name)
- Amundsen Issue: [amundsen-io/amundsen#0000](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsen/issues/0000) (leave this empty for now)

# <RFC title>

## Summary

> One paragraph explanation of the feature.

## Motivation

> Why are we doing this? What use cases does it support? What is the expected outcome?

## Guide-level Explanation (aka Product Details)

> Explain the proposal as if it was already included in Amundsen and you were teaching it to an Amundsen user. That generally means:

> Introducing new named concepts.
> Explaining the feature largely in terms of examples.
> Explaining how Amundsen users should think about the feature, and how it should impact the way they use Amundsen. It should explain the impact as concretely as possible.
> If applicable, provide deprecation warnings, or migration guidance.
> For implementation-oriented RFCs, this section should focus on how maintainers should think about the change, and give examples of its concrete impact. For policy RFCs, this section should provide an example-driven introduction to the policy, and explain its impact in concrete terms.

## UI/UX-level Explanation

> Explain the UI changes that your proposal would need (if applicable). This could mean:

> Provide a high level diagram or wireframe about the change.
> If applicable, suggest error, empty and loading states for the change.

## Reference-level Explanation (aka Technical Details)

> This is the technical portion of the RFC. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

> Its interaction with other features is clear.
> It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
> Corner cases are dissected by example.
> The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

## Drawbacks

> Why should we _not_ do this?

> Please consider:
> Implementation cost, both in term of code size and complexity
> Integration of this feature with other existing and planned features
> The impact on onboarding and learning about Amundsen
> Cost of migrating existing Amundsen installations (is it a breaking change?)
> If there are tradeoffs to choosing any path. Attempt to identify them here.

## Alternatives

> Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?
> What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
> What is the impact of not doing this?

## Prior art

> Discuss prior art, both the good and the bad, in relation to this proposal. A few examples of what this can include are:

> Does this feature exist in other data search applications and what experience have their community had?
> For community proposals: Is this done by some other community and what were their experiences with it?
> Papers: Are there any published papers or great posts that discuss this? If you have some relevant papers to refer to, this can serve as a more detailed theoretical background.

> This section is intended to encourage you as an author to think about the lessons from other projects, provide readers of your RFC with a fuller picture. If there is no prior art, that is fine - your ideas are interesting to us whether they are brand new or if it is an adaptation from other projects.

## Unresolved questions

> What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the RFC process before this gets merged?
> What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the implementation of this feature before stabilization?
> What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?

## Future possibilities

> Think about what the natural extension and evolution of your proposal would be and how it would affect the project as a whole in a holistic way. Also consider how the this all fits into the roadmap for the project and of the relevant sub-team.
> This is also a good place to "dump ideas", if they are out of scope for the RFC you are writing but otherwise related.
> If you have tried and cannot think of any future possibilities, you may simply state that you cannot think of anything.

Commit message:

Adds comments about UX/UI changes on RFCs; updates some RFC file names
Signed-off-by: Marcos Iglesias <miglesiasvalle@lyft.com>

templates/000-feature-template.md, after:

- Feature Name: (fill me in with a unique ident, my_awesome_feature)
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: [amundsen-io/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/amundsen-io/rfcs/pull/0000) (after opening the RFC PR, update this with a link to it and update the file name)
- Amundsen Issue: [amundsen-io/amundsen#0000](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsen/issues/0000) (leave this empty for now)

# <RFC title>

## Summary

> One paragraph explanation of the feature.

## Motivation

> Why are we doing this? What use cases does it support? What is the expected outcome?

## Guide-level Explanation (aka Product Details)

> Explain the proposal as if it was already included in Amundsen and you were teaching it to an Amundsen user. That generally means:

> Introducing new named concepts.
> Explaining the feature largely in terms of examples.
> Explaining how Amundsen users should think about the feature, and how it should impact the way they use Amundsen. It should explain the impact as concretely as possible.
> If applicable, provide deprecation warnings, or migration guidance.
> For implementation-oriented RFCs, this section should focus on how maintainers should think about the change, and give examples of its concrete impact. For policy RFCs, this section should provide an example-driven introduction to the policy, and explain its impact in concrete terms.

## UI/UX-level Explanation

> Explain the UI changes that your proposal would need (if applicable). This could mean:

> Provide at least a low-fidelity wireframe of the change.
> If applicable, suggest error, empty and loading states for the change.

## Reference-level Explanation (aka Technical Details)

> This is the technical portion of the RFC. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

> Its interaction with other features is clear.
> It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
> Corner cases are dissected by example.
> The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.

## Drawbacks

> Why should we _not_ do this?

> Please consider:
> Implementation cost, both in term of code size and complexity
> Integration of this feature with other existing and planned features
> The impact on onboarding and learning about Amundsen
> Cost of migrating existing Amundsen installations (is it a breaking change?)
> If there are tradeoffs to choosing any path. Attempt to identify them here.

## Alternatives

> Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?
> What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
> What is the impact of not doing this?

## Prior art

> Discuss prior art, both the good and the bad, in relation to this proposal. A few examples of what this can include are:

> Does this feature exist in other data search applications and what experience have their community had?
> For community proposals: Is this done by some other community and what were their experiences with it?
> Papers: Are there any published papers or great posts that discuss this? If you have some relevant papers to refer to, this can serve as a more detailed theoretical background.

> This section is intended to encourage you as an author to think about the lessons from other projects, provide readers of your RFC with a fuller picture. If there is no prior art, that is fine - your ideas are interesting to us whether they are brand new or if it is an adaptation from other projects.

## Unresolved questions

> What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the RFC process before this gets merged?
> What parts of the design do you expect to resolve through the implementation of this feature before stabilization?
> What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?

## Future possibilities

> Think about what the natural extension and evolution of your proposal would be and how it would affect the project as a whole in a holistic way. Also consider how the this all fits into the roadmap for the project and of the relevant sub-team.
> This is also a good place to "dump ideas", if they are out of scope for the RFC you are writing but otherwise related.
> If you have tried and cannot think of any future possibilities, you may simply state that you cannot think of anything.
